P a g e | 2 Biosafety Guidance Document
Table of Contents
Change/Highlight Section...................................................................................................................................3
Introduction........................................................................................................................................................3
Definitions ..........................................................................................................................................................4
Biosafety/Biocontainment Plan Provision Requirements..................................................................................4
Hazardous Characteristics of Select Agents and Toxins.................................................................................4
Safeguards for Protecting Against Exposure to Select Agents and Toxins.....................................................5
Engineering controls...................................................................................................................................5
Containment equipment............................................................................................................................6
Secondary Containment.............................................................................................................................6
Enclosure and Isolation ..............................................................................................................................7
Administrative Controls..............................................................................................................................7
Work Practices............................................................................................................................................7
Personal protective equipment (PPE) ........................................................................................................8
Disinfection, Decontamination or Destruction of Select Agent and Toxin ....................................................9
Handling Select Agents and Toxins in Shared Spaces...................................................................................11
Appendix I: Principles of decontamination, sterilization, and disinfection......................................................13
P a g e | 3 Biosafety Guidance Document
Change/Highlight Section 
Revisions: This is a living document subject to ongoing improvement. Feedback or suggestions for
improvement from entities registered with the Federal Select Agent Program, as well as the general public, 
are welcomed. Submit comments directly to the Federal Select Agent Program at:
DSAT: LRSAT@cdc.gov
AgSAS: AgSAS@aphis.usda.gov
Revision History: 
March 2017: Initial posting
July 2018: Revised format, removed appendices 1 and 2 and added “Disinfectants” section to appendix. 
Introduction
This document is intended to provide guidance and assist entities in developing and implementing a written 
biosafety/biocontainment plan, as required by section 12 of the select agent regulations (7 C.F.R. Part 331, 
9 C.F.R. Part 121, and 42 C.F.R. Part 73). This template summarizes current regulatory and procedural 
criteria for registered entities and provides examples for verifying compliance. It does not add to, delete 
from, or change current regulatory requirements or standards. For entities registered for Tier 1 select 
agents and toxins that require an occupational health program, reference the Occupational Health Program 
Guidance for more information. It should be noted that information regarding an occupational health 
program may be incorporated into the biosafety plan and that two separate plans are not required. 
There are resources available to assist entities in the development of biosafety/biocontainment plans such 
as:
 “Biosafety in Microbiological and Biomedical Laboratories (BMBL),”
 “NIH Guidelines for Research Involving Recombinant or Synthetic Nucleic Acid Molecules (NIH
Guidelines),”
 Occupational Safety and Health Administration, “Laboratory Safety Guidance,”
 “Containment Facilities and Safeguards for Exotic Plant Pathogens and Pests” (Robert P. Kahn and
S.B. Mathur eds., 1999),
 “A Practical Guide to Containment: Plant Biosafety in Research Greenhouses” (Dann Adair and Ruth
Irwin, 2008), and
 Detailed instructions on training requirements, including Biosafety/Biocontainment Training, can be
found in Guidance for Select Agent Regulation Training Requirements.
These resources can be used as guidance to assist in the development of the biosafety/biocontainment 
plan. However, entities may use other comparable biosafety/biocontainment guidelines when 
developing and implementing a written plan. It should be noted that the Federal Select Agent Program 
inspects registered entities in accordance with the current versions of these nationally recognized 
standards. 
P a g e | 4 Biosafety Guidance Document
Definitions
As used in this document the following terms have the following meanings: 
Decontamination – Disinfection or sterilization of articles contaminated with toxins or agents to make the 
articles safe for use or disposal. 
Disinfection – The elimination of nearly all recognized pathogenic microorganisms but not necessarily all 
microbial forms (e.g., bacterial spores) on inanimate objects.
Risk – The potential for an adverse outcome assessed as a function of threats, vulnerabilities, and 
consequences associated with an incident, event, or occurrence.
Risk Assessment – The process of evaluating the risk(s) arising from a hazard(s), taking into account the 
adequacy of any existing controls and deciding whether or not the risk(s) is acceptable.
Select agents and toxins – A subset of biological agents and toxins that the Departments of Health and 
Human Services (HHS) and Agriculture (USDA) have determined to have the potential to pose a severe 
threat to public health and safety, to animal or plant health, or to animal or plant products. The current list 
of select agents and toxins can be found at 42 CFR §§ 73.3, 73.4, 9 CFR §§ 121.3, 121.4, and 7 CFR § 331.3.
Also see the current select agents and toxins list.
Sterilization – Any item, device, or solution is considered to be sterile when it is completely free of all living 
microorganisms and viruses. The definition is categorical and absolute (i.e., an item is either sterile or it is 
not). A sterilization procedure is one that kills all detectable microorganisms, including high numbers of 
bacterial endospores.
Tier 1 Select agents and toxins – A subset of select agents and toxins have been designated as Tier 1 
because these biological agents and toxins present the greatest risk of deliberate misuse with significant 
potential for mass casualties or devastating effect to the economy, critical infrastructure, or public 
confidence, and pose a severe threat to public health and safety: Bacillus anthracis, Bacillus cereus Biovar 
anthracis, Botulinum neurotoxins, Botulinum neurotoxin producing species of Clostridium, Burkholderia 
mallei, Burkholderia pseudomallei, Ebola virus, Francisella tularensis, Foot-And-Mouth Disease virus, 
Marburg virus, Rinderpest virus, Variola major virus (Smallpox virus), Variola minor virus (Alastrim), and 
Yersinia pestis.
Biosafety/Biocontainment Plan Provision Requirements
Hazardous Characteristics of Select Agents and Toxins
It is important that the biosafety/biocontainment plan contain the hazardous characteristics of each agent 
or toxin listed on the entity's registration and the biosafety/biocontainment risk associated with laboratory 
procedures related to the select agent or toxin.
To assist with identifying the hazardous characteristics of each agent or toxin and the biosafety risk 
P a g e | 5 Biosafety Guidance Document
associated with laboratory procedures related to the select agent or toxin, the BMBL is an excellent 
reference and includes agent summary statements that describe the hazards, recommended precautions,
additional risks, and levels of containment appropriate for handling select agents and toxins in the 
laboratory. The BMBL also states that HEPA filtration of exhaust air should be required when working with
all BSL-4 select agents, and other agents to include: Classical swine fever virus, Reconstructed 1918 
influenza virus, Rift Valley fever virus, Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus, and Highly pathogenic avian 
influenza virus.
The NIH Guidelines provide further guidance on risk assessment, physical containment, and biological 
containment provisions relating to genetic elements, recombinant nucleic acids and recombinant select 
agents and toxins.
In addition, AgSAS has developed Guidelines for Avian Influenza Viruses to assist individuals and entities 
with developing policies and implementing procedures for working safely with these viruses.
In considering hazardous characteristics of each agent or toxin, the entity should discuss the hazards of 
agent cross-contamination in laboratories performing work with multiple select agents and agent strains to 
prevent the accidental transfer of agents. Areas to consider are:
• Characteristics of agent or toxin (e.g., virus, bacteria; [e.g., spore or non-spore forming], mode of 
transmission, etc.), and work being performed
• Work practices to prevent dissemination outside primary containment and exposure 
• Engineering Controls to prevent dissemination 
• Decontamination of laboratory work surfaces, equipment, and select agent and toxin waste to 
prevent dissemination 
Safeguards for Protecting Against Exposure to Select Agents and Toxins
Section 12(a)(2) of the select agent regulations state that the biosafety/biocontainment plan must include
Safeguards in place with associated work practices to protect entity personnel, the public, and the 
environment from exposure to the select agent or toxin including, but not limited to: 
 Engineering controls such as containment equipment; including, but not limited to:
o Biological safety cabinets 
o Animal caging systems
o Centrifuge safety containers
 Administrative Controls such as vaccinations and the creation of biosafety plans and procedures
 Work Practices such as procedures that describes safe and proper work practices
 Personal protective equipment (PPE)
Please note that the entity should focus and think about the agents and procedures specific to their facility 
to ensure that they are using the appropriate equipment and practices for the conditions of their 
laboratory.
Engineering controls
The basic concept behind engineering controls is that, to the extent feasible, the work environment and the 
biosafety/biocontainment risk associated with the laboratory procedures should be designed to eliminate 
P a g e | 6 Biosafety Guidance Document
hazards or reduce exposure to hazards. Engineering controls should be based on the following principles:
 If feasible, design the facility, equipment, or process to remove the hazard.
 If removal is not feasible, enclose the hazard to prevent exposure during normal operations.
 Where complete enclosure is not feasible, establish barriers or local ventilation to reduce exposure 
to the hazard during normal operations.
The basic types of engineering controls are:
 Process control 
 Enclosure and/or isolation of source 
 Ventilation
Some examples of engineering controls may include: 
 Building ventilation/exhaust or HVAC (heating, ventilation and air conditioning) must provide safe, 
comfortable, breathable environments for all employees and the public, and to minimize exposures 
to hazardous air contaminants. At BSL-3 and BSL-4, exhaust laboratory air must be directly 
exhausted to the outside since it is considered potentially contaminated. The exhausted room air 
can be high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA)-filtered to prevent the hazards from being released to 
the outside environment. The HVAC exhaust system must be sized to handle both the room 
exhaust and the exhaust requirements of all containment devices that may be present. Adequate 
supply air must be provided to ensure proper function of the exhaust system.
 Biological safety cabinet (BSC) is an enclosed, ventilated laboratory workspace for safely working 
with materials contaminated with BSAT. The BMBL is an excellent reference to assist with 
identifying and selecting a BSC.
 Effluent Decontamination System (EDS) is defined as a system that sterilizes biohazardous liquid 
waste generated from biocontainment laboratories or other facilities prior to discharge. 
 Pathological incinerators, alkaline hydrolysis digesters, or other approved means, must be provided 
for the safe disposal of the large carcasses of infected animals. Redundancy and the use of multiple 
technologies need to be considered and evaluated.
 Anaerobic digesters use a biochemical process in which organic matter is decomposed by bacteria 
in the absence of oxygen. Digesters must be airtight (no oxygen) for anaerobic digestion to occur.
Containment equipment
The containment equipment should focus on:
o Biological safety cabinets 1 Evers et. al. (2013) Laboratory Decontamination of HHS-listed 
and HHS/USDA Overlap Select Agents and Toxins. Applied Biosafety. 18: 2, pp. 59-72.
o Animal/arthropod caging systems
o Plant growth chambers
o Centrifuge safety containers
Secondary Containment 
Secondary containment is the protection of the environment external to the laboratory from exposure to 
infectious materials and is provided by a combination of facility design and operational practices. 
Secondary containment may include separation of the laboratory work area from public access, availability 
of decontamination equipment (e.g., autoclave), separate clean and dirty corridors, double entry ways, air 
locks, hand washing facilities, etc. 
P a g e | 7 Biosafety Guidance Document
Enclosure and Isolation
An enclosure keeps a selected hazard "physically" separated from workers. Enclosed equipment, for 
example, is tightly sealed and it is typically only opened for moving samples/cultures or for cleaning and 
maintenance. Examples include closed animal caging, "glove boxes" or Class III biosafety cabinets. Care 
must be taken when the enclosure is opened for maintenance as exposure could occur if adequate 
precautions are not taken. The enclosure itself must be well maintained to prevent leaks.
Isolation places the hazardous process "geographically" away from the majority of the workers. Common 
isolation techniques are to create a contaminant-free area either around the equipment or around the 
employee workstations.
Administrative Controls
Administrative controls are those that modify workers’ work schedules and tasks in ways that minimize
their exposure to workplace hazards. Examples include vaccinations and developing plans and procedures 
to reduce the risk to the worker. The plan should explain the following: 
 Process controls should be appropriate for the activities performed and the select agent or toxin in 
use. Biosafety/biocontainment levels are dependent on the risks of the work being performed. 
o For example, the BMBL recommends BSL-3 practices, containment equipment and facilities 
for all manipulations of suspect cultures of Francisella tularensis. In contrast, BSL-2 
practices, containment equipment, and facilities are recommended for diagnostic activities 
involving infectious cultures of Bacillus anthracis, Burkholderia mallei, Burkholderia 
pseudomallei, and Yersinia pestis, where there is no propagation of the agent or risk of 
aerosol or droplet formation only. All other activities with these agents are to be conducted 
at BSL-3.
 Describe detailed safety measures to ensure that primary and secondary containment are 
maintained during especially hazardous procedures (e.g., intentional production of select agent 
infectious aerosols or select toxin aerosols).
Work Practices
Work practices should involve procedures to reduce the risk of exposure (e.g., hand washing, spill 
procedures, using foot decontamination methods, maintaining the concept of clean and dirty spaces, etc.). 
Monitoring should be done before and after any change is implemented to make sure a change results in 
lower exposures. The plan should also describe the biosafety and containment procedures employed for 
experimentally exposed or infected animals or plants, if applicable:
 When animals or plants are to be infected with or exposed to select agents, describe the 
administration route(s) employed and the equipment used.
 Describe in detail appropriate containment of all organic material (select agent-infected carcasses, 
tissues, plant biomass) until final destruction (e.g., autoclave, incineration, etc.).
 Describe or reference procedures to monitor animals or plants for accidental infection. 
 Describe procedures to ensure containment of animals accidentally exposed to or infected with 
select agents. Considerations for developing these procedures include but are not limited to, 
situations where an airflow reversal has occurred from a room harboring experimentally infected 
P a g e | 8 Biosafety Guidance Document
animals to an adjacent room housing native animals; or movement of personnel, equipment, or 
laboratory waste from a select agent area to a non-select agent area has resulted in accidental 
exposure.
 When animals infected with select agents are either loosely housed or housed in open caging, there 
is an increased potential of room-level select agent contamination. Unless it can be demonstrated 
that the animal model does not shed the agent, the increased hazard of not using containment 
caging must be mitigated by procedural or facility enhancements. 
Personal protective equipment (PPE) 
In determining the PPE and other safety equipment needed, consider the hazardous characteristics of each 
agent or toxin listed on the entity's registration and the risk associated with laboratory procedures related 
to the select agent or toxin. The PPE and other safety equipment should focus on:
 Breathing or respiratory protection 
 Eye and face protection
 Head protection
 Hearing protection
 Hand/arm protection (gloves, sleeves)
 Foot protection
 Full body protection
When considering laboratory clothing, the entity needs to determine what PPE should be worn to prevent 
hazards from leaving the laboratory (i.e., how clothing can be a fomite to carry BSAT out of laboratories and 
how the clothing should be cleaned, disinfected, or disposed, should street clothes being worn or wearing 
scrubs or full body PPE, should individuals shower out, include general principles for separation of clean 
and dirty boundaries). Employees should be educated that PPE must not be worn outside the containment 
laboratory except when transporting samples between laboratories within containment. It must not be 
worn (or stored) in break rooms, office areas, toilets, or outside the building. Employees must be properly 
instructed on how to don (put on) required PPE before entering an area with a potential hazard that 
requires the use of the PPE. Procedures for employees to remove (doff) required PPE before leaving the 
area of potential exposure should be structured to prevent transfer of infectious material outside 
laboratory room, as well as protect workers from exposure to infectious agents during exit procedures.
P a g e | 9 Biosafety Guidance Document
Biological Safety - Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) Requirements*
BSL-1 BSL-2 BSL-3 BSL-4
 Protective laboratory 
coats, gowns, or 
uniforms recommended to 
prevent contamination of 
personal clothing. 
 Protective eyewear worn 
when conducting 
procedures that have the 
potential to create 
splashes of 
microorganisms or other 
hazardous materials. 
Personnel who wear 
contact lenses in 
laboratories should also 
wear eye protection. 
 Gloves must be worn to 
protect hands from 
exposure to hazardous 
materials. 
 Protective laboratory 
coats, gowns, smocks, 
or uniforms must be worn 
while working with 
hazardous materials. 
 Eye and face protection 
(goggles, mask, face 
shield or other splatter 
guard) must be used for 
anticipated splashes or 
sprays of infectious or 
other hazardous materials 
when the microorganisms 
are handled outside the 
Biological Safety Cabinet 
(BSC) or physical 
containment device.
Personnel who wear 
contact lenses in 
laboratories should also 
wear eye protection. 
 Gloves must be worn to 
protect hands from 
exposure to hazardous 
materials.
 Eye, face and respiratory 
protection should be used 
in rooms containing 
infected animals. 
 Protective laboratory 
clothing with a solidfront, such as tie-back or 
wrap-around gowns, scrub 
suits, or coveralls must be 
worn. 
 Eye and face protection 
(goggles, mask, face 
shield or other splash 
guard) must be used for 
anticipated splashes or 
sprays of infectious or 
other hazardous materials. 
[All procedures involving 
the manipulation of 
infectious materials must 
be conducted within a 
BSC, or other physical 
containment devices.]
Personnel who wear 
contact lenses in 
laboratories must also 
wear eye protection. 
 Gloves must be worn to 
protect hands from 
exposure to hazardous 
materials. 
 Eye, face, and 
respiratory protection 
must be used in rooms 
containing infected 
animals. 
 Cabinet Laboratory: All 
work is conducted in a 
class III biosafety cabinet,
 All materials appropriately 
decontaminated 
(disinfectant tank) prior to 
removal from biosafety 
cabinet.
 The class III biosafety 
cabinet serves as 
engineering control to 
prevent worker exposure 
to infectious agents and 
material.
• Protective Suit 
Laboratory: All work is 
conducted within a class II 
biosafety cabinet with the 
Use of a positive pressure 
suit connected to a HEPA 
filtered airline. The 
positive pressure suit 
completely isolates the 
laboratory worker from the 
laboratory environment, 
ensuring there is no
contact with potentially 
hazardous material. 
Laboratory personnel who 
work in positive pressure 
suits require significant 
training.
Disinfection, Decontamination or Destruction of Select Agent and Toxin1
See the Inactivation guidance for more information on the inactivation of and rendering samples free of 
select agents and select toxins for future use. In addition, reference Appendix I: Principles of 
decontamination, sterilization, and disinfection provides additional information regarding decontamination 
and disinfection. 
For material that is disinfected, decontaminated, or destroyed as waste, section 12(a)(3) states that the 
biosafety/biocontainment plan must contain written procedures for each validated method used for 
disinfection, decontamination, or destruction, as appropriate, of all contaminated or presumptively 
contaminated material including, but not limited to:
 Cultures and other materials related to the propagation of select agents or toxins
 Items related to the analysis of select agents and/or toxins
 
1 Evers et. al. (2013) Laboratory Decontamination of HHS-listed and HHS/USDA Overlap Select Agents and Toxins. 
Applied Biosafety. 18: 2, pp. 59-72.
P a g e | 10 Biosafety Guidance Document
 Personal protective equipment
 Animal caging systems and bedding (if applicable)
 Animal carcasses or extracted tissues and fluids (if applicable)
 Plant biomass (if applicable)
 Laboratory surfaces and equipment
 Surfaces of transport containers
 Effluent material
The plan should describe the following:
 Adherence to the concentration and contact time specified by the manufacturer of a disinfectant
during laboratory surface decontamination procedures to be effective in decontaminating the 
select agent and toxin material.
 Ensure that procedures follow any equipment manufacturer guidance on the disinfectants 
compatible with their equipment. 
 Define waste management procedures based on the types of waste generated (e.g., PPE, plates, 
liquids, eggs, animal caging, carcasses, sharps) and the containers most appropriate for the types of 
waste being produced.
 Describe in detail safety procedures for decontaminating reusable sharps.
 Describe the procedure for safe transport of waste to the decontamination site, including the 
location of the decontamination equipment in relation to the laboratory generating the waste. 
Transport procedures must take into account any safety requirements to protect personnel and the 
environment during transport. 
 Specify the actual method(s) used to decontaminate select agent and toxin waste (e.g., autoclave, 
incinerators, renderers, tissue digester, chemical, etc.). 
 Describe the means of verifying that decontamination equipment is operating correctly, and how 
often verification is performed (i.e., biological indicators [BIs], confirmation of cycle parameters). 
o For autoclave verification, BIs or parametric monitors should be placed in the center of the 
load in a manner expected to provide the maximum challenge for steam penetration. 
When BIs are used, they should be incubated for the length of time stated by the 
manufacturer and a positive control should be used. The temperature of the material to be 
autoclaved must be considered when verifying the autoclave parameters (e.g., frozen 
carcasses will require a longer sterilization time than non-frozen carcasses).
o For chemical decontamination, the chemical used must be appropriate for the select agent 
or toxin (Manufacturers normally test surrogates and not select agents and toxins. This 
would be acceptable), and the chemical concentration and contact time must be defined in 
the procedure. The procedure should also address whether chemicals used for 
decontamination must be freshly prepared or can be stored, and the shelf life if stored.
 Describe the method(s) used to decontaminate laboratory surfaces and equipment (e.g., chemical 
surface decontamination, or space fumigation using Vaporized Hydrogen Peroxide, 
paraformaldehyde, or chlorine dioxide). The method selected must be appropriate for the 
P a g e | 11 Biosafety Guidance Document
equipment and the select agents and toxins used in the laboratory. Procedures should indicate 
contact time required which may be variable depending on agent and equipment. 
o Fumigation used as a means to inactivate select toxins requires the use of a published 
method or method validation.
o Fumigation procedures for select agent inactivation should include the use of biological 
indicators to verify adequate decontamination.
 Describe how entity personnel are notified of the status of decontamination of laboratory surfaces 
and equipment.
 Describe how entity personnel are notified of ongoing or completed decontamination activities for 
laboratory spaces.
 Describe when laboratory surfaces and equipment should be decontaminated. 
Note: Although the regulations require written procedures for each validated method used for 
disinfection, decontamination or destruction, as appropriate, of all contaminated or presumptively 
contaminated materials, an entity does not have to validate the method in-house. A validated method 
is a method that has been shown to render materials safe to handle (i.e., safe in the context of being 
reasonably free from a risk of disease transmission). The validation of methods for disinfection, 
decontamination or destruction of select agent waste does not have to occur in-house since this 
material is not for future use. Further, validation does not have to be performed on select agents but 
can be performed on surrogates. However, entities must use the concentrations and conditions 
prescribed by manufacturers, the BMBL, or other government regulations, such as those promulgated 
by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The inactivation provisions for future use material do 
not apply to disinfection, decontamination or destruction of select agent waste.
Handling Select Agents and Toxins in Shared Spaces
Section 12(a)(4) of the regulations requires the entity to describe procedures for the handling of select 
agents and toxins in the same spaces with non-select agents and toxins in order to prevent unintentional 
contamination. For example: 
 Laboratory work surfaces, equipment, and all select agent and toxin waste that must be 
decontaminated prior to transitioning to work with non-select agents or toxins.
 How personnel are made aware of the status of any particular room or laboratory at any given 
time.
 Spatial and/or temporal considerations when performing tissue culture studies.
 Any concurrent work with Reconstructed 1918 Influenza virus and highly pathogenic avian 
influenza virus.
 Sterilization of all samples at the end of the study/experiment/procedure.
Precautions should be taken to prevent cross-contamination of viral select agents in cell cultures. Some 
means of preventing accidental transfer of agents between cultures include: 
o Working with only one select agent at a time.
P a g e | 12 Biosafety Guidance Document
o Decontaminating biosafety cabinet with a surface disinfectant between select agents and 
toxins.
o Allowing a certain amount of time to pass between decontamination and beginning work 
with another select agent.
o Changing gloves when changing from one select agent to another.
o Aliquoting growth medium and other reagents so that the same vessel is not used for more 
than one select agent.
P a g e | 13 Biosafety Guidance Document
Appendix I: Principles of decontamination, sterilization, and disinfection 
Decontamination
Decontamination can include a number of processes that render an area, device, item, or material safe to 
handle (i.e., safe in the context of being reasonably free from a risk of disease transmission). The primary 
objective is to reduce the level of microbial contamination so that infection transmission is eliminated. The 
decontamination process may include a cleaning step prior to disinfection or sterilization.
2
Cleaning
Cleaning is a process that can be an important adjunct in the decontamination process by removal of organic 
and inorganic materials from objects and surfaces prior to sterilization or disinfection. This process can remove a 
large number of microorganisms as well and the organic matter protecting them. Cleaning is normally
accomplished manually or mechanically using water with detergents or enzymatic products. Liquid for cleaning 
should be treated as liquid biohazardous waste.
Disinfection
Some chemical germicides used as disinfectants do, in fact, kill large numbers of spores, though high 
concentrations of the chemical germicides and several hours of exposure may be required. Non-sporicidal 
disinfectants may differ in their capacity to accomplish disinfection. Some germicides rapidly kill only the 
vegetative forms of bacteria such as staphylococci and streptococci, some forms of fungi, and lipid-enveloped
viruses, whereas others are effective against such relatively resistant organisms as Mycobacterium tuberculosis
var. bovis, non-lipid viruses, and most forms of fungi.
3
The effectiveness of a disinfection procedure is controlled by several factors, including:
 Nature and number of contaminating microorganisms (especially the presence of bacterial spores)
 Amount of organic matter present (e.g., soil, feces, and blood)
 Type and condition of instruments, devices, and materials to be disinfected
 Temperature
 Time
 pH
 Water hardness
 Other chemicals used (e.g., mixing with certain detergents)
Sterilization
Results from sterilization procedures, however, can only be expressed in terms of the probability of viable 
 
2
Fraise, AP. (2004) Decontamination of the environment and medical equipment in hospitals. In Principles and Practices of 
Disinfection, Preservation and Sterilization, 4th edition eds Fraise, AP, Lambert, PA and Maillard J-Y, p 565.
3 BMBL, p 327
P a g e | 14 Biosafety Guidance Document
organisms surviving after a sterilization procedure.4 A probability level of less than one in one million microbial 
survivors (10-6
) after treatment is a commonly accepted measure of sterility. This is referred to as the “sterility 
assurance level.”
5
Decontamination of Solid and Liquid Wastes
All laboratory waste materials, contaminated animal or plant materials, and personal protective equipment 
(PPE) that are contaminated with BSAT should be decontaminated prior to removal from BSAT registered 
containment areas. However, there are situations when equipment used for terminal decontamination such as
autoclaves, incinerators, digesters, renderers, or effluent decontamination systems (EDS), are located outside of 
registered BSAT spaces. 
If the solid waste decontamination area (e.g., such as autoclave rooms, digester or renderer rooms, and 
incinerator facilities) is not inside the containment barrier of the laboratory, an entity should ensure the 
following practices are in place (Note: The area would not need to be listed on an entity registration or 
separately registered as long as the area is not used for the storage of BSAT solid waste):
 Ensure that a person who has FSAP approved access to BSAT (approved by FSAP to have access to BSAT 
subsequent to a FBI security risk assessment) transports solid BSAT waste. For a Tier 1 BSAT, or material 
contaminated with a Tier 1 BSAT, the person also must be enrolled in the entity’s personnel suitability 
program.
 Transport waste by FSAP approved staff using personal protective equipment (PPE) deemed appropriate 
for the agent or toxin as determined by a risk assessment.
 Transport solid waste to the decontamination unit in leak-proof sealed containers. The outside surface 
of these containers must be decontaminated with an appropriate disinfectant before being removed 
from containment. Place the container in the decontamination apparatus. The container must remain 
sealed until the decontamination cycle is completed. 
 Start the decontamination unit as soon as the material is placed in the unit. The FSAP approved person 
must confirm to his satisfaction that the decontamination cycle has begun. This person is not required to 
remain in the area during the entire decontamination cycle but only to be reasonably assured that the 
cycle has begun.
 The FSAP approved person confirms that the decontamination cycle, using system settings validated to 
render the contaminated material non-infectious or non-toxic, has been completed according to system 
specifications.
 Keep the decontamination unit on a maintenance schedule. Maintenance schedules usually include 
periodic spot-checks for problems, semi/annual service, and re-certification by a qualified technician.
 Create a process for verifying all parameters of the decontamination cycle have been attained (e.g., 
recording tape, biological indicators, probes, etc.).
 Maintain written documentation that the decontamination procedure is validated for the specific agent, 
toxin, and/or material decontaminated.
 Maintain a chain of custody document for solid waste that leave registered spaces for decontamination.
 Check if the decontamination apparatus is working properly and is adequately maintained.
The entity incident response plan should include a plan for material that leaves the laboratory to be 
 
4
Lambert, PA. (2004) Sterilization. In Principles and Practices of Disinfection, Preservation and Sterilization, 4th edition eds
Fraise, AP, Lambert, PA and Maillard J-Y, p 389.
5 Baird, RM. (2004) Sterility assurance: concepts, methods and problems. In Principles and Practices of Disinfection, 
Preservation and Sterilization, 4th edition eds Fraise, AP, Lambert, PA and Maillard J-Y, p 526-539.
P a g e | 15 Biosafety Guidance Document
decontaminated offsite and for material that remains in the building. Ideally, waste should not be transported 
through an unregistered area. If the entity has no other option, include a description in the entity’s incident 
response plan addressing how the entity will deal with a spillage or release. The plan must also include 
procedures for documenting unintended spills or accidents during transport. There is a requirement for the 
notification of the appropriate Federal, state, and/or local officials and first responders in the event of an offsite 
spill.
Ensure that procedures are in place for decontamination of personnel and the PPE worn by personnel 
responding to a spill. As needed, include medical surveillance after potential exposure to select agents and 
toxins during the clean-up process.
Any departure from a standardized method protocol should be revalidated. The entity could validate the 
autoclaved decontamination method used with a biological indicator, such as Geobacillus stearothermophilus.
Liquid waste that is not decontaminated in the solid waste decontamination stream may be decontaminated by 
several means. Contaminated liquid from showers may be disinfected by chemical disinfectant following 
manufacturer’s specifications including purging the plumbing trap before and after the shower. Contaminated 
liquid waste may be decontaminated by holding in a container or sink with a chemical disinfectant for the 
appropriate amount of time. An EDS, while not required, may also be utilized if large amounts of liquid waste, 
such as liquid from showers and from animal holding facilities, are generated. If the entity has an EDS, the entity 
should conduct the following practices: 
• Restrict access to the EDS. Non-FSAP-approved staff or visitors should be monitored and allowed 
controlled access for official duties only.
• Create and maintain written documentation that the decontamination procedure is validated for the 
specific agent, toxin, and/or material being decontaminated.
• Validate any changes in standardized methods.
• Keep a regular maintenance schedule. Maintenance schedules may include daily or monthly checks 
or regular service.
• Validate the EDS system under actual in-use conditions that may include high levels of bioburden or 
high matrix content, such as in infected animal holding areas. 
o This may include use the solid waste decontamination process above for disposing of animal 
bedding and/or high volume of fecal matter. 
• Maintain training records that the EDS operation staff have been trained on how to respond to leaks 
and spills. 
• Inspect the pipe leading from the containment area to the EDS to ensure it is sealed at least
annually. A double walled pipe is preferred. 
• Put procedures and structures in place to contain more liquid than the EDS system would process in 
the event a spill of the liquid from the EDS tanks (e.g. a berm surrounding the EDS tanks that holds 
greater volumes than the tanks). 
• Ensure that procedures are in place for the cleanup and decontamination of a spill from the EDS.